Alejandro|Rivero Vadillo|FROM THE FANTASTIC POSTHUMAN TO ECOMODERN REALISM: A CARTOGRAPHY OF SOLARPUNK SCIENCE FICTION|/repo/FROM THE FANTASTIC POSTHUMAN TO ECOMODERN REALISM: A CARTOGRAPHY OF SOLARPUNK SCIENCE FICTION.pdf|2022|The purpose of this article is to synthetically (but critically) map the representation of eco-technological themes in the US Solarpunk literary genre, namely by addressing the different short story collection available in the market. The text analyzes the evolution of these fictions from its original conceptualization as a soft science fiction mode to the contemporary narratives that feature a new interest for the hard science fiction variety, one interested in visualizing technological tools that could be potentially deployed in order to mitigate the problems developed by climate change and other anthropogenic damages against the planet. This study is introduced with a brief exploration of the history of the genre and then analyzes both some with the ways in which solarpunk, clearly in symbiosis with contemporary approaches to posthumanism, has shifted its sense of aesthetics, messages and political ethos during the last decade, aiming to materialize possible optimistic futures for an Earth in which industrialization has manage to survive and co-exist with a sustainable planet in the Anthropocene.
William|Kees Schuller|Evolution Takes Love: Tracing Some Themes of the Solarpunk Genre|/repo/“Evolution Takes Love:” Tracing Some Themes of the Solarpunk Genre.pdf|2019|This project aims at examining some of the core themes and concerns of Solarpunk,a newly emerging genre. Placing Solarpunk in contrast to one of its nearest literary predecessors, Cyberpunk, I work to unify the disparate definitions of the Solarpunk genre, while examining the ways in which it departs from its Cyberpunk roots while retaining a radical critical mode. By mapping and defining some of Solarpunk’s primary concerns in this way, this project aims to set the groundwork for additional critical work on the Solarpunk genre, providing a foundation from which other scholars may work. Throughout the thesis I work primarily with the four English language Solarpunk anthologies, Solarpunk: Ecological and Fantastical Stories in a Sustainable World, Wings of Renewal: A Solarpunk Dragons Anthology, Sunvault: Stories of Solarpunk and Eco-Speculation, and Glass and Gardens: Solarpunk Summers. In Chapter One, I examine the interrelationship of social ecology, technological progress, and social progress with questions of community and society, in order to demonstrate the ways in which Solarpunk promotes its ideal, social ecology inspired future. In Chapter Two, I build on the generic interest in progress in order to examine Solarpunk’s optimistic treatment of the posthuman in relation to questions of physiological and capitalist consumption, and fears over the loss of humanity.
William|Joseph Gillam|A Solarpunk Manifesto: Turning Imaginary into Reality|/repo/A Solarpunk Manifesto: Turning Imaginary into Reality.pdf|2023|In the last century, science fiction has become an incredibly powerful tool in depicting alternative social imaginaries, particularly those of the future. Extending beyond their fictious nature is a commentary on the stark realities of modern society. The ‘cyberpunk’ subgenre, for example, offers a dystopian critique on the dangers of technological dependence and hypercapitalism. In studying science fiction, future imaginaries can be developed as utopian goals for governance systems to strive for. In contrast to cyberpunk, the subgenre of ‘solarpunk’ depicts a utopian society where humanity lives locally, sustainably, and in harmony with nature. This paper deconstructs solarpunk media to describe three guiding principles of solarpunk: anarchism, ecology, and justice. As an anarchist community, solarpunk strives for a post-scarcity, post-capitalist society devoid of hierarchy and domination. As an ecological community, solarpunk strives for local, self-sufficient, and sustainable living where both the human and non-human flourish. Finally, as a just community, solarpunk strives to rid society of marginalization and celebrate authenticity. These three principles can be used to guide humanity towards a utopian, solarpunk future.
Dalila|Forni|Solarpunk visions in youth fiction. The pedagogical utopia of Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind|/repo/Solarpunk visions in youth fiction. The pedagogical utopia of Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind.pdf|2023|The essay examines the traits and pedagogical potential of the solarpunk artistic and narrative movement by analyzing the specific case study of Hayao Miyazaki’s animated film Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind (1984). The article first presents solarpunk and its association with environmental themes and successively applies the genre’s theoretical framework to the case study, as Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind shares some of the movement’s approaches and aesthetics in relation to sustainability. The essay concludes with a pedagogical reflection on the potential of solarpunk to imagine and create sustainable worlds. Although this artistic movement is not explicitly aimed at a young audience, solarpunk stories (or a solarpunk reading of different narratives) could lead to a new understanding of the ongoing climate change and to a constructive call for environmental responsibility starting from a young age.
Isaijah|Johnson|Solarpunk & the Pedagogical Value of Utopia|/repo/“Solarpunk” & the Pedagogical Value of Utopia.pdf|2020|This paper examines the ecologically oriented speculative fiction genre known as “solarpunk” and its value for the cause of environmental justice. This article argues that the status quo is characterized by relative inaction on the issue of fighting climate change and that this inaction is the result of an inability to imagine a “green” future. As a form of speculative fiction which explicitly depicts such green futures, solarpunk may be a valuable tool in promoting action by overcoming widespread cynicism about the future. Solarpunk fiction is thus a useful tool for sustainability educators because it encourages critical examination of one’s environmental impact. This article details the ways in which solarpunk stories function as counter-hegemonic media by intertwining issues of race, gender, sexuality, class, and colonialism with an ecological ethic.
